docs/source/user_guide/getting_started.rst, before:


Getting started
===============
This page is a quick guide to get you started with the Energibruksmodell (EBM) framework. The framework is designed to calculate energy use in buildings. The framework is developed by the Norwegian Water Resources and Energy Directorate (NVE).


Requirements
------------

``EBM`` requires Python 3.11 or newer.


Quick Start Guide
-----------------

Please, open your preferred terminal and follow the instructions below.

.. image:: ../_static/getting_started/ebm-in-windows-terminal.png


Installation
^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. only:: internal

   .. admonition:: For NVE

      For kjøring internt hos NVE er ikke dette steget nødvendig. Du kan i stedet åpne
      ``Tilkobling mot eksternt skrivebord`` og bruke Datamaskin: |ebm_installation_host|. Dersom du ikke
      har tilgang til |ebm_installation_host|. Kontakt brukerstøtte.

      Når du er koblet til |ebm_installation_host| kan du gå videre til :ref:`What version of ebm are we running?`


Install ebm using pip


.. code-block:: bash

  python -m pip install energibruksmodell




.. note::

    To figure out what EBM version you have installed, you can type ``ebm --version``
    These instructions are made for |version|, but should work for later versions as well.


What version of ebm are we running?
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Once installed need to setup input files with all the parameters required to  run ``EBM``. But before we do that, let's
check if ebm is working properly. Open a terminal (powershell) and type:

.. code-block:: bash

   ebm --version

The output should look something like this:

.. admonition:: expected output
   :collapsible: open
   :class: expected-output

   .. code-block:: powershell

    PS C:\Users\user> ebm --version
    ebm 1.2.9
    PS C:\Users\user>

The output show what version of ebm you are running. Don't worry if the version number you get is a bit off from the one
in the example. It will probably be fine.


Create an input directory
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Before running the model you need to create a directory with the necessary input files. The recommended way of creating
the directory is to use ebm:

.. code-block:: bash

   ebm --create-input


.. admonition:: expected output
   :collapsible: closed
   :class: expected-output

   .. code-block:: powershell

      PS C:\Users\user\Documents> python -m ebm --create-input
      0:00:01.25 - Using data from "input"
      0:00:01.26 - Copy input from C:\Users\user\pyc\Energibruksmodell\ebm\data
      0:00:01.26 - Creating directory input
      0:00:01.28 - Creating missing file  input\building_code_parameters.csv
      0:00:01.30 - Creating missing file  input\s_curve.csv
      0:00:01.33 - Creating missing file  input\population_forecast.csv
      0:00:01.35 - Creating missing file  input\new_buildings_residential.csv
      0:00:01.38 - Creating missing file  input\area_new_residential_buildings.csv
      0:00:01.42 - Creating missing file  input\area.csv
      0:00:01.45 - Creating missing file  input\energy_need_behaviour_factor.csv
      0:00:01.48 - Creating missing file  input\energy_need_original_condition.csv
      0:00:01.51 - Creating missing file  input\improvement_building_upgrade.csv
      0:00:01.54 - Creating missing file  input\energy_need_improvements.csv
      0:00:01.57 - Creating missing file  input\holiday_home_energy_consumption.csv
      0:00:01.60 - Creating missing file  input\holiday_home_stock.csv
      0:00:01.62 - Creating missing file  input\area_per_person.csv
      0:00:01.65 - Creating missing file  input\heating_system_initial_shares.csv
      0:00:01.68 - Creating missing file  input\heating_system_efficiencies.csv
      0:00:01.71 - Creating missing file  input\heating_system_forecast.csv
      0:00:01.71 - Finished creating input files in input


The command creates a new directory called ``input`` with the default input parameters. You can use a different directory
by adding the ``--input=<directory name>`` option.


Run the model
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

You are now ready to run the model. Use the bare command ``ebm`` with no options:

.. code-block:: bash

   ebm


.. admonition:: expected output
   :collapsible: open
   :class: expected-output

   .. code-block:: powershell

      PS C:\Users\user\Documents> python -m ebm
      0:00:01.44 - Using data from "input"
      0:00:04.58 - Wrote output\area.xlsx
      0:00:04.97 - Wrote output\heating_system_share.xlsx
      0:00:05.34 - Wrote output\heat_prod_hp.xlsx
      0:00:09.32 - Wrote output\energy_use.xlsx
      0:00:17.10 - Wrote output\energy_purpose.xlsx
      0:00:18.39 - Wrote output\demolition_construction.xlsx


By default the scenario is read from ``input``, and the results are written to the directory ``output``.

You can get a directory listing that shows all the result files created by issuing the command:

.. code-block:: bash

   ls output

The resulting output should look something like:

.. admonition:: expected output
   :collapsible: open
   :class: expected-output

   .. code-block:: powershell


           Directory: C:\Users\user\Documents\output


       Mode                 LastWriteTime         Length Name
       ----                 -------------         ------ ----
       -a----        18.09.2025     12:27          98844 area.xlsx
       -a----        18.09.2025     12:27         119998 demolition_construction.xlsx
       -a----        18.09.2025     12:27         647028 energy_purpose.xlsx
       -a----        18.09.2025     12:27         526083 energy_use.xlsx
       -a----        18.09.2025     12:27          32244 heating_system_share.xlsx
       -a----        18.09.2025     12:27           7349 heat_prod_hp.xlsx
       -a----        13.02.2025     11:18             50 README.md


If your shell does not have the ``ls`` command, you might have better luck with ``dir``.

The files can be opened using your favourite spreadsheet application. I.E. Microsoft Excel or LibreOffice Calc.



.. tip::

    If you want to open the results automatically as they become available, you can use the switch ``--open``.

    .. code-block:: bash

       ebm --open



.. seealso::

   :ref:`result files`
        An overview of the contents of all the output files.
   :ref:`Additional arguments <user-guide-additional-arguments>`
        Shows all the commands available for ``ebm``.
   :ref:`User case`
        gives a run-down on how you can change the input files to better suit your needs.



.. |date| date::

Last Updated on |date|.

Version: |version|.

Commit message:

#3219 Use model instead of framework

docs/source/user_guide/getting_started.rst, after:


Getting started
===============
This page is a quick guide to get you started with the Energibruksmodell (EBM) model. The model is designed to calculate
energy use in the norwegian building stock. The model is developed by the
`Norwegian Water Resources and Energy Directorate (NVE) <https://www.nve.no>`_.


Requirements
------------

``EBM`` requires Python 3.11 or newer.


Quick Start Guide
-----------------

Please, open your preferred terminal and follow the instructions below.

.. image:: ../_static/getting_started/ebm-in-windows-terminal.png


Installation
^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. only:: internal

   .. admonition:: For NVE

      For kjøring internt hos NVE er ikke dette steget nødvendig. Du kan i stedet åpne
      ``Tilkobling mot eksternt skrivebord`` og bruke Datamaskin: |ebm_installation_host|. Dersom du ikke
      har tilgang til |ebm_installation_host|. Kontakt brukerstøtte.

      Når du er koblet til |ebm_installation_host| kan du gå videre til :ref:`What version of ebm are we running?`


Install ebm using pip


.. code-block:: bash

  python -m pip install energibruksmodell




.. note::

    To figure out what EBM version you have installed, you can type ``ebm --version``
    These instructions are made for |version|, but should work for later versions as well.


What version of ebm are we running?
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Once installed need to setup input files with all the parameters required to  run ``EBM``. But before we do that, let's
check if ebm is working properly. Open a terminal (powershell) and type:

.. code-block:: bash

   ebm --version

The output should look something like this:

.. admonition:: expected output
   :collapsible: open
   :class: expected-output

   .. code-block:: powershell

    PS C:\Users\user> ebm --version
    ebm 1.2.9
    PS C:\Users\user>

The output show what version of ebm you are running. Don't worry if the version number you get is a bit off from the one
in the example. It will probably be fine.


Create an input directory
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Before running the model you need to create a directory with the necessary input files. The recommended way of creating
the directory is to use ebm:

.. code-block:: bash

   ebm --create-input


.. admonition:: expected output
   :collapsible: closed
   :class: expected-output

   .. code-block:: powershell

      PS C:\Users\user\Documents> python -m ebm --create-input
      0:00:01.25 - Using data from "input"
      0:00:01.26 - Copy input from C:\Users\user\pyc\Energibruksmodell\ebm\data
      0:00:01.26 - Creating directory input
      0:00:01.28 - Creating missing file  input\building_code_parameters.csv
      0:00:01.30 - Creating missing file  input\s_curve.csv
      0:00:01.33 - Creating missing file  input\population_forecast.csv
      0:00:01.35 - Creating missing file  input\new_buildings_residential.csv
      0:00:01.38 - Creating missing file  input\area_new_residential_buildings.csv
      0:00:01.42 - Creating missing file  input\area.csv
      0:00:01.45 - Creating missing file  input\energy_need_behaviour_factor.csv
      0:00:01.48 - Creating missing file  input\energy_need_original_condition.csv
      0:00:01.51 - Creating missing file  input\improvement_building_upgrade.csv
      0:00:01.54 - Creating missing file  input\energy_need_improvements.csv
      0:00:01.57 - Creating missing file  input\holiday_home_energy_consumption.csv
      0:00:01.60 - Creating missing file  input\holiday_home_stock.csv
      0:00:01.62 - Creating missing file  input\area_per_person.csv
      0:00:01.65 - Creating missing file  input\heating_system_initial_shares.csv
      0:00:01.68 - Creating missing file  input\heating_system_efficiencies.csv
      0:00:01.71 - Creating missing file  input\heating_system_forecast.csv
      0:00:01.71 - Finished creating input files in input


The command creates a new directory called ``input`` with the default input parameters. You can use a different directory
by adding the ``--input=<directory name>`` option.


Run the model
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

You are now ready to run the model. Use the bare command ``ebm`` with no options:

.. code-block:: bash

   ebm


.. admonition:: expected output
   :collapsible: open
   :class: expected-output

   .. code-block:: powershell

      PS C:\Users\user\Documents> python -m ebm
      0:00:01.44 - Using data from "input"
      0:00:04.58 - Wrote output\area.xlsx
      0:00:04.97 - Wrote output\heating_system_share.xlsx
      0:00:05.34 - Wrote output\heat_prod_hp.xlsx
      0:00:09.32 - Wrote output\energy_use.xlsx
      0:00:17.10 - Wrote output\energy_purpose.xlsx
      0:00:18.39 - Wrote output\demolition_construction.xlsx


By default the scenario is read from ``input``, and the results are written to the directory ``output``.

You can get a directory listing that shows all the result files created by issuing the command:

.. code-block:: bash

   ls output

The resulting output should look something like:

.. admonition:: expected output
   :collapsible: open
   :class: expected-output

   .. code-block:: powershell


           Directory: C:\Users\user\Documents\output


       Mode                 LastWriteTime         Length Name
       ----                 -------------         ------ ----
       -a----        18.09.2025     12:27          98844 area.xlsx
       -a----        18.09.2025     12:27         119998 demolition_construction.xlsx
       -a----        18.09.2025     12:27         647028 energy_purpose.xlsx
       -a----        18.09.2025     12:27         526083 energy_use.xlsx
       -a----        18.09.2025     12:27          32244 heating_system_share.xlsx
       -a----        18.09.2025     12:27           7349 heat_prod_hp.xlsx
       -a----        13.02.2025     11:18             50 README.md


If your shell does not have the ``ls`` command, you might have better luck with ``dir``.

The files can be opened using your favourite spreadsheet application. I.E. Microsoft Excel or LibreOffice Calc.



.. tip::

    If you want to open the results automatically as they become available, you can use the switch ``--open``.

    .. code-block:: bash

       ebm --open



.. seealso::

   :ref:`result files`
        An overview of the contents of all the output files.
   :ref:`Additional arguments <user-guide-additional-arguments>`
        Shows all the commands available for ``ebm``.
   :ref:`User case`
        gives a run-down on how you can change the input files to better suit your needs.



.. |date| date::

Last Updated on |date|.

Version: |version|.
