docs/source/heating_systems/methods.rst, before:

Methods
=======

Initial shares
--------------
The initial heating system shares are based on the Norwegian energy building performance database. The database contains information on the energy class
of certified buildings. There are 1,2 million certificates in total spread out among the 13 building categories, however for some categories, especially 
non-residental buildings, the number of certificates are low. Some cleaning is done on the dataset to filter out misleading certificates and duplicates.

* Removed certificates missing building category, heated floor area or energy performance label
* Removed certificates where calculated delivered energy is above 1000 kWh/m:sup:'2'.
* If a certificate has been issued to the same address more than once, the most recent certificate is kept. This is done for all building categories except for apartment blocks or hospitals as one address can contain multiple buildings or apartments. For apartments the house number is often missing.

After these three steps there are about 1 million certificates remaining. The associated building code classification is added to the certificates based on the supplied 
building year. 

The certificates has a column for "heating system". This column can vary from one or more energy products or a combination of various technologies. 
About 130 000 certificates do not have this information. For certificates missing this information an estimate is done based on the combination of 
"delivered energy". For example if the certificate has values in the "bio" and "electricity" delivered energy columns the heating system is set to
"Electricity - Bio". This results in 190 different heating systems which is then aggregated to 12 categories shown in the table below, together with the
corresponding technology for the different loads and hot tap water. 

.. csv-table:: Heating systems overview
   :file: ..\tables\heating_systems_table.csv
   :widths: 15, 15, 15, 15, 15
   :header-rows: 1


The share of each heating system is the useful area summed up per heating system, building category and building code and then divided by the total useful
area of the given building category and building code. The useful area is part of the energy certificates.  

Manual tuning
-------------
The described process gives a good starting point on the distribution of heating systems, but manual fine tuning is needed, especially on
heat pumps and wood stoves. The share of heat pumps is adjusted up, and the share of wood stoves is adjusted down. The manual tuning on heating systems is done 
to roughly hit the energy use from statistics before calibration for a given year is completed. Manual tuning is done by shifting a percentage
of a heating system to another on a per building and TEK basis. An example is given below which shifts 45 % of the district heating technology share
into Heat pump central heating and electric boilers for apartment blocks in TEK07, TEK10 and TEK17. 

.. code-block:: python
  
  {
    "current_heating_system": "DH",
    "new_heating_system": "HP Central heating - Electric boiler",
    "share": 0.45,
    "list_buildings": ["Apartment block"],
    "list_TEK": ["TEK07", "TEK10", "TEK17"]
  }

Aggregating the heating systems
-------------------------------
The energy balance is reported on "residential" and "non-residential" buildings without any other details such as building code or 
specific building type. To get a good point of comparison we aggregate the heating systems to three categories:
* House
* Apartment block
* Non-residential buildings

First the initial heating system shares are assigned to the useful area given in the start year. This is done for each building category and
condition. It is assumed that the four different building conditions have the same heating systems under a given building code. The share of each 
heating system is the useful area summed up per heating system, aggregated building category and building code and then divided by the total useful
area of the given building category and building code. The new aggregated heating systems are then set for all the building codes in the three building categories.
Meaning that a TEK69 house has the same share heating systems as a TEK17 house, and a TEK69 kindergarten has the same share of heating systems as a TEK10 office.
The resulting heating systems are then used as an input to the model. An example on the aggreagted heating systems is given below for houses.

.. csv-table:: Aggregated heating systems - house
  :file: ..\tables\shares_house_pretek49.csv
  :widths: 15, 15, 15, 15, 15
  :header-rows: 1

A final tuning of the heating systems are done in the calibration step of the model. For more information on calibration see :any:`Calibrating the model`.

Forecasting of heating systems
-------------------------------
Forecasting of heating systems are necessary to go from *energy need* to *energy use*. 
The forecasting defines the rate of change in one heating system to another towards 2050. The change is done on a percentage basis compared with the start 
year and can be specified on building category and building code. The percentage changes are given in the input file "heating_systems_forecasting". 
An example of the input is given in the table below. In the input file there are percentages for every year and not just the few years given as an example. 
The rate of change is a way to look at the heating systems of the whole building mass as it includes both 
retrofits and new construction. I.e it is not feasible for an exisiting apartment block to switch over 
to distrcit heating, but a house retrofitting an air-air heat pump is possible.


.. csv-table:: Heating systems forecasting example.
  :file: ..\tables\heating_systems_projection.csv
  :widths: 10, 10, 15, 15, 5, 5 ,5, 5, 5
  :header-rows: 1

From the first row it states that in 2024 10 % of the heating system "Gas" in non-residental buidlings changes to
the heating system "HP Central heating - Electric boiler". If the heating system share of "Gas" was 5 % in 2023 and
"HP Central heating - Electric boiler" was 10 % for non-residental buildings, then the shares in 
2024 are 4,5 % "Gas" and 10,5 % "HP Central heating - Electric boiler". As 10 % of 5 % has changed from one heating system 
to another, as per the table.

An example on how the forecasted heating systems are shown in the figure below. Here the share of air-air heatpumps is increased over time by shrinking
the share of "Electriciy - Bio" and increasing the share of "HP - Electricty - Bio". 

.. raw:: html
  :file: ..\images\Hus.html

.. |date| date::

Last Updated on |date|.

Version: |version|.

Commit message:

added how to change input in heating systems

docs/source/heating_systems/methods.rst, after:

Methods
=======

Initial shares
--------------
The initial heating system shares are based on the Norwegian energy building performance database. The database contains information on the energy class
of certified buildings. There are 1,2 million certificates in total spread out among the 13 building categories, however for some categories, especially 
non-residental buildings, the number of certificates are low. Some cleaning is done on the dataset to filter out misleading certificates and duplicates.

* Removed certificates missing building category, heated floor area or energy performance label
* Removed certificates where calculated delivered energy is above 1000 kWh/m :sup:`2`.
* If a certificate has been issued to the same address more than once, the most recent certificate is kept. This is done for all building categories except for apartment blocks or hospitals as one address can contain multiple buildings or apartments. For apartments the house number is often missing.

After these three steps there are about 1 million certificates remaining. The associated building code classification is added to the certificates based on the supplied 
building year. 

The certificates has a column for "heating system". This column can vary from one or more energy products or a combination of various technologies. 
About 130 000 certificates do not have this information. For certificates missing this information an estimate is done based on the combination of 
"delivered energy". For example if the certificate has values in the "bio" and "electricity" delivered energy columns the heating system is set to
"Electricity - Bio". This results in 190 different heating systems which is then aggregated to 12 categories shown in the table below, together with the
corresponding technology for the different loads and hot tap water. 

.. csv-table:: Heating systems overview
   :file: ..\tables\heating_systems_table.csv
   :widths: 15, 15, 15, 15, 15
   :header-rows: 1


The share of each heating system is the useful area summed up per heating system, building category and building code and then divided by the total useful
area of the given building category and building code. The useful area is part of the energy certificates.  

Manual tuning
-------------
The described process gives a good starting point on the distribution of heating systems, but manual fine tuning is needed, especially on
heat pumps and wood stoves. The share of heat pumps is adjusted up, and the share of wood stoves is adjusted down. The manual tuning on heating systems is done 
to roughly hit the energy use from statistics before calibration for a given year is completed. Manual tuning is done by shifting a percentage
of a heating system to another on a per building and TEK basis. An example is given below which shifts 45 % of the district heating technology share
into Heat pump central heating and electric boilers for apartment blocks in TEK07, TEK10 and TEK17. 

.. code-block:: python
  
  {
    "current_heating_system": "DH",
    "new_heating_system": "HP Central heating - Electric boiler",
    "share": 0.45,
    "list_buildings": ["Apartment block"],
    "list_TEK": ["TEK07", "TEK10", "TEK17"]
  }

Aggregating the heating systems
-------------------------------
The energy balance is reported on "residential" and "non-residential" buildings without any other details such as building code or 
specific building type. To get a good point of comparison we aggregate the heating systems to three categories:
* House
* Apartment block
* Non-residential buildings

First the initial heating system shares are assigned to the useful area given in the start year. This is done for each building category and
condition. It is assumed that the four different building conditions have the same heating systems under a given building code. The share of each 
heating system is the useful area summed up per heating system, aggregated building category and building code and then divided by the total useful
area of the given building category and building code. The new aggregated heating systems are then set for all the building codes in the three building categories.
Meaning that a TEK69 house has the same share heating systems as a TEK17 house, and a TEK69 kindergarten has the same share of heating systems as a TEK10 office.
The resulting heating systems are then used as an input to the model. An example on the aggreagted heating systems is given below for houses.

.. csv-table:: Aggregated heating systems - house
  :file: ..\tables\shares_house_pretek49.csv
  :widths: 15, 15, 15, 15, 15
  :header-rows: 1

A final tuning of the heating systems are done in the calibration step of the model. For more information on calibration see :any:`Calibrating the model`.

Forecasting of heating systems
-------------------------------
Forecasting of heating systems are necessary to go from *energy need* to *energy use*. 
The forecasting defines the rate of change in one heating system to another towards 2050. The change is done on a percentage basis compared with the start 
year and can be specified on building category and building code. The percentage changes are given in the input file "heating_systems_forecasting". 
An example of the input is given in the table below. In the input file there are percentages for every year and not just the few years given as an example. 
The rate of change is a way to look at the heating systems of the whole building mass as it includes both 
retrofits and new construction. I.e it is not feasible for an exisiting apartment block to switch over 
to distrcit heating, but a house retrofitting an air-air heat pump is possible.


.. csv-table:: Heating systems forecasting example.
  :file: ..\tables\heating_systems_projection.csv
  :widths: 10, 10, 15, 15, 5, 5 ,5, 5, 5
  :header-rows: 1

From the first row it states that in 2024 10 % of the heating system "Gas" in non-residental buidlings changes to
the heating system "HP Central heating - Electric boiler". If the heating system share of "Gas" was 5 % in 2023 and
"HP Central heating - Electric boiler" was 10 % for non-residental buildings, then the shares in 
2024 are 4,5 % "Gas" and 10,5 % "HP Central heating - Electric boiler". As 10 % of 5 % has changed from one heating system 
to another, as per the table.

An example on how the forecasted heating systems are shown in the figure below. Here the share of air-air heatpumps is increased over time by shrinking
the share of "Electriciy - Bio" and increasing the share of "HP - Electricty - Bio". 

.. raw:: html
  :file: ..\images\Hus.html

Making changes to heating systems
---------------------------------
The easiest way to change the initial shares of heating systems is through *Kalibreringsark.xlsx* as part of the calibration process described here :any:`Calibrating the model`.
The input file *heating_system_initial_shares.csv* remains unchanged with this method. It is possible to change the heating systems share in the input file. 
All combinations of building code and building category are given their own heating systems share, but the shares themselves are indentical for each respesctive 
building category of house, apartment block and non-residental building. 

Making changes to the efficiency, energy product or utilisation factor can be done for each of the 12 combinations of heating systems in the input 
file *heating_systems_efficiencies.csv*. An overview of the heating system combinations can be found in the :any:`Tables and glossary` subchapter.


.. |date| date::

Last Updated on |date|.

Version: |version|.
